[GAIA THEME MUSIC]
[MYSTERY TEACHINGS THEME MUSIC]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings".
Have you ever found
yourself needing
to make sacrifices
for a higher purpose
or to establish greater
balance in your life?
These are key lessons on
any path of initiation
and self-actualization.
We're now at the turning
point on the Hero's journey
of awakening our
multi-dimensional self.
We're halfway
through this journey,
and these next steps are
pivotal points in determining
our success in the ascent.
In this episode, we
meet the archetypes
of Justice and The Hanged Man.
These are the
archetypal principles
of equilibrium and sacrifice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
On the Mandala Wheel
of the 231 gates
as it now rotates clockwise
two keys 11 and 12,
we pass through
the turning point
at the bottom of the wheel,
and then begin our ascent
up the right side.
We're in the process of
seeking to understand
the universal laws and directly
experience the alchemy at work
within our own souls.
So as we take this next
step on the Hero's Journey,
we meet Justice.
And Justice holds
the central position
in the major arcana sequence.
It's a pivot for all the
other keys, an exchange
point that all the
archetypal energies
are transmitted through.
Justice is the
mediator in tarot.
It maintains a dynamic
balance among all of them,
and it's constantly
weighing, negotiating,
and deciding what's aligned
with the highest good of all.
If The Wheel is the gate
or the portal to ascension,
then Justice is the
guardian at that gate.
The old alchemists used
to say that equilibrium
is the basis of the
great work, and Justice
is all about this concept
or lesson of equilibrium,
the balancing of
polarities in order
to truly stand in the middle
pillar of peace and joy.
Justice says, it's time to
grow up and take responsibility
for ourselves and our lives.
[GAVEL KNOCKS]
And so, Justice is
teaching us about the laws
of karma or cause and effect.
And it's time for
us to realize how
all effects have their cause
and how we are at cause.
But being at cause isn't
always a matter of just
our physical actions.
It could be that we caused
a string of events based
purely on our activities
in the mental,
emotional, and spiritual planes.
Justice teaches us discernment.
Not only do we need to be
discerning in our actions,
we must also be discerning in
our thoughts, in our words,
and in what emotions
we let drive us.
She also assesses whether
we're treating others
fairly and being treated
fairly ourselves.
Justice also embodies
the archetypes
that deal with all matters
of law, both universal laws
and human laws.
Now, our task is to come to
understand the universal laws
and become aligned with them.
Now, Justice is ruled
by the number 11,
so let's take a look
at this numerology.
11 is the first master
number in the sequence
and it's in mystical number.
It has a lot of
mystical properties.
A master number is when a single
number is repeated in sequence.
In this case, we're
repeating the number 1
and it's doubly emphasized.
So 11 is a double emphasis of 1.
Now, 11 is also a
higher octave of 2,
because when we add the 1 and
the 1 together it gives us 2.
Now, 2 is the first
duality, which
results from the one reflecting
or duplicating itself.
It's a mirror.
So the 11, then, is when our
individual self-consciousness
will see its own reflection in
the mirror of the true self.
Let's look now to the imagery
and the symbolism contained
within the Justice card.
[GAVEL KNOCKS]
We see a blonde
androgynous woman
who sits between the
Pillars of Polarity
with a set of scales
in her left hand
and a sword raised
in her right hand.
Now, the sword
represents discernment,
while the scales
represent balance.
And this suggests that
discerning individuals examine
and balance both their mental
and emotional prejudices
in order to make wise decisions.
In one side of the
scales is our mind.
In the other side is our
emotions and our desires.
Now, the scales universally
will signify the weighing
of our actions, our deeds,
and the outcome of our intent
and motive against
our actions and deeds.
Do they weigh in the balance?
The Justice's scales
show her function
is to constantly compensate
and adjust for any imbalances.
So she acts like the
carpenter's level,
showing which side of a project
or issue needs adjustment.
If a person is imbalanced
on the side of mercy,
for example, then
the sword of Justice
swings to the side of
severity and vise versa.
The unbalanced aspects get
severed by the sword of Justice
in a very controlled
yet martial fashion.
Her sword is lifted in
the defense of Justice
and none can escape it.
And it points upward here in the
card, which indicates victory.
It's a positive symbol.
Now, this is also though
a double-edged sword.
So it can swing both ways.
It can either cut
away or it can be
used to consecrate
so that whatever
is false may be separated
from whatever is true.
Now, its action is
also like a pendulum,
which only comes to
rest at the very center
after that swinging
of the pendulum
between the different
polarities has been quieted down
and it comes to center.
We also see that
Justice is crowned,
which is a reference to
Kathara on the Tree of Life
at the very top the crown.
And this is the
highest or most perfect
state of being on
the Tree of Life.
So she is said to be crowned
with the Cap of Maintenance,
which is her job to maintain
that equilibrium and purity.
Now Justice's robes
are red and green,
indicating a combination
of Mars, which is the red,
and Venus, which is the
green, working together.
Now, that red symbolizes
action or masculine energy,
and is also associated
with The Emperor.
While the green is the color of
Venus, the goddess of nature,
and love, and beauty,
and she is The Empress.
So very much like how The
Emperor and The Empress
characteristics act together
to complement one another,
we see them both coming
together here within Justice.
Now, just like the
colors of red and green
also compliment each
other, when they're
combined they make gray.
And gray is a color associated
with wisdom and neutrality.
And gray, we see
here, is the color
of the pillars, the foundation,
and the seat of Justice.
Justice is also
associated sometimes
with the color yellow
in the background,
and this refers
to the connection
to the element of air and
our thinking capacities.
Notice, also, how Justice
extends her foot, showing
that she's ready to act.
Now, psychologically
this picture
illustrates the law of
poise and self-direction.
A balanced personality is one
that's faithful, constant,
confident, and because of
the right use of reason,
it helps us to know that
our actions are just.
Now, behind Justice we
also see a purple curtain.
And that purple relates to the
color of the Wheel of Fortune,
which was the previous key.
Now, this curtain is
stretched between the pillars
and it covers what
is beyond them,
and this hints at Justice's role
as the guardian at the gate.
The pillars form the
two sides of a gate,
and we must be weighed in the
balance of Justice's scales
before we can pass
through beyond that veil.
Now, the veil represents the
illusions, the delusions,
and the self-deception that
we must break through in order
to clearly see and truly see.
Now, the pillars that
Justice sits between also
reflect the imagery
in The High Priestess,
where we also see those pillars.
We also see them
in The Hierophant.
And like in The High
Priestess and The Hierophant,
Justice's pillars symbolize
that achieving of neutrality
or a well balanced
perspective and coming
into the middle pillar.
Now, what is Justice
trying to teach us?
Well, Justice is our conscience.
It's our own inner
voice that's guiding
us to make the right
decisions and helping
us recognize where we
need to achieve greater
balance within ourselves.
It releases the
energy for clearing
the baggage from our
life and the karma,
both past and present.
Now, it's a life path that
will stimulate and even force
equilibrium.
Now, Justice manifests
opportunities
for us to learn the proper
application of our thoughts,
our actions, as well as
how to properly blend
both physical and
spiritual aspects of life.
And once we realize
that we are souls first,
then that is when the higher
levels will open up to us.
This is about knowing and
living our purpose in life.
Now, what are some other
important correspondences
of Justice?
Well, in the Egyptian
system, the Halls of Judgment
belong to the
goddess Ma'at, who is
the goddess of truth and order.
Her symbol was the white feather
that represented righteousness
and purity, and she
sat upon the scales
in the Egyptian
story of the Dead.
As the story goes, once a soul
transitions into the afterlife,
they must first pass through
the trials in the underworld.
They're basically
opportunities to help
us let go of regrets,
falsehoods, and attachments
from our physical life.
It's kind of like a life review.
And at the end of
these trials, the soul
comes to a place called
the Halls of Judgment.
And there, the heart
of the deceased
is going to be
weighed in the scales
against the feather of Ma'at.
This is to assess the
deeds of that person
and whether they lived a
righteous and pure life.
And Thoth, the lord
of wisdom, is the one
who measures the balance.
He assesses.
Now, the soul, the
deceased, stands
in the presence of
42 gods and goddesses
of the ancient
Egyptian pantheon.
And during this
process, they would
speak what they call
the negative confession.
It's kind of like a repentance.
They're confessing
what they know
they did in life, and maybe
the regrets that they had,
and they're giving their story.
And their heart is
what knows and weighs
in the balance with that feather
of Ma'at, the Feather of Truth.
And only once their heart
weighs as light as a feather,
then will the soul be permitted
to pass through that portal
and to join the eternal gods.
So this idea of
living a pure life,
and letting go of the
burdens, and cutting them away
so that our heart and
our soul can become
as light as that
Feather of Truth
is the key lesson
here with Justice.
Now, the secret name
of Justice, as well as
the secret name of Ma'at, is The
Daughter of The Lords of Truth
and The Ruler of The Balance.
She relates to the
element of air,
which is related to the
sign of Libra and astrology.
Libra is an active air sign.
And the main attribute
of Libra is a desire
for refined balance and truth.
Now, Libra, which is also
symbolized by the scales,
rules the seventh house
of the zodiac, which
is the house of partnership,
both business and marriage type
partnerships.
Because there is a fine
line between love and hate,
it should not be surprising
to note that Libra also
governs both close relationships
as well as open enemies.
Now, Libra tries to be fair, but
at times can appear judgmental.
Now, Libras would
do well in careers
dealing with legal issues,
financial balancing,
or business acumen.
Now, in astrology,
Libra is also ruled
by the planet Venus, which is
associated with The Empress.
And because it's ruled
by Venus, Libras often
have a sense of peace,
tranquility, regeneration,
especially when
they're in nature.
The Libra personality
says, I balance,
I equilibrate, I adjust,
I agree, I idealize,
and I harmonize.
Some of the strengths that
she helps us to achieve
and the virtues that get
awakened within us as we work
with Justice are a sense of
integrity, responsibility,
and being objective.
Now, these strengths are the
pure expression of Justice.
But if they go out
of balance, then it
creates the
weaknesses of Justice.
Now, some of those
weaknesses and vices
that we have to watch out for
here are being too judgmental,
or getting caught up
in dualities, maybe
a failure to make
good decisions.
Now, Justice really helps us
to make the karmic adjustments
that we need to in
our life to come
to a greater state of grace.
It also encourages us to
access artistic creativity,
and it gives us
courage to do what
we need to do to achieve
greater balance in life.
And sometimes that also
means forgiveness, forgiving
what we need to let
go of in the past.
And it helps us with
revelations as well as
dealing with consequences.
Now, think of times when you've
either been or encountered
Justice in your life.
Now, as children, we all
come to a point in our lives
where our parents
had to take some kind
of disciplinary action with
us, to set boundaries or give
consequences for bad behavior.
Now, if you're a parent,
then perhaps you've
had to be the hand of
Justice in the life
of your own child at times.
It's hard, but when
it's done from love
and with the right measure of
discipline, then it is just,
and it helps that
child to mature.
Now, at different
times in our life,
Justice will also
step in to bring
balance between two
opposing areas of life
representing the scales.
For example, we
often hear people
talk about work-life balance.
Now, how much are we
taking care of ourselves
versus pouring our
energy into work?
Also, any time that we've
worked to achieve, or maintain,
or even regain
balance in life, we
have been drawing upon
the energy of Justice.
And the more you recognize
Justice in your life
here and now, the
more it will also
connect you with one
of your parallel lives
where Justice is the
dominant archetype.
Examples might include a
judge, a negotiator, lawyer,
law enforcement officers.
[SIRENS WAIL]
Justice also deals with
publications and weighing
our words.
So sometimes they might thrive
as a writer or an editor.
By working with Justice
and invoking its energies
into your life, you can
heighten your abilities
to discern truth from false
and to bring greater balance
into your life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, once we pass Justice's
test and measuring,
our next step on
the Hero's journey
brings us to The Hanged Man.
Often you'll find
interpretations of The Hanged
Man as being more
about a punishment
of a traitor in which
Justice has just
delivered their sentence.
But when looking at these
cards from a surface level,
yeah, that might make sense.
But the esoteric meaning
of The Hanged Man archetype
is far more profound than this.
The Hanged Man is
the first card that
begins our ascension
of consciousness
back up the wheel
of the 231 gates.
It's a key of what we call
suspended animation or a vision
quest.
Now, it represents the
principles of surrender
as well as a reversal
of our concepts,
and it links us to the
archetypal energies
that stimulate new
perspectives in life.
Now, we're not meant
to focus solely
on just the material
plane and what it's
like to be in a physical life.
So this path releases
the desire to merge
with a universal consciousness.
Now, The Hanged Man is
ruled by the number 12.
So let's take a look at
the numerology of 12.
It represents a complete
cycle of manifestation
into the physical.
There are many
significant occurrences
of this number
throughout history.
For example, we have
12 months in a year,
12 signs of the zodiac, 12
Apostles, 12 tribes of Israel,
12 dimensions of Earth,
just to name a few.
Now, 12 usually relates
to the physical around.
The Hanged Man's
position on the wheel
is the beginning
of the ascension,
so it tells us that
we've already learned all
that we need to
learn about being
physical through
the previous keys.
Now, it's time to reclaim
our spiritual powers.
The Hanged Man's number 12
also breaks down to a 1 plus 2
equals 3, which is the
number for The Empress,
The Path of Love.
And this is a reminder
that divine love
includes complete love
for ourselves and others.
And The Hanged Man is thus
an outward form or expression
of this love.
Now, let's explore the symbolism
and imagery of The Hanged Man
card.
We see a young man
hanging suspended
from his right foot that's tied
to a tree shaped like a capital
T. His other foot crosses
behind it forming a cross out
of his legs.
His arms are clasped
behind his back,
and he hangs inverted with
his head though illuminated
by a halo of yellow light.
And notice the
expression on his face.
It's very peaceful.
Plus, his eyes are opened.
Now, this is
clearly not an image
of execution or
even persecution.
A more appropriate
title might be
The Hanging Man or
The Hanging One,
the one suspended
between Heaven and Earth.
So he represents a
vantage point which
brings a radical new perspective
or a reversal of our concepts.
He's literally turning
his world upside down.
Now, The Fool has reached
a point in his journey
where the knowledge
of his inner world
becomes far more important
than that of the outer world.
He must now come to grips
with unconscious forces
within himself.
And he needs to sacrifice the
control of his conscious ego
by now surrendering
to his inner world.
So he's on a vision quest.
This is a rite of initiation
that is depicted here.
Now, this is something
that can only
be done by our willing
and conscious choice.
It's not something that can
be forced on us from anything
outside, although maybe
sometimes circumstances
might contribute to us
wanting to pursue such a path.
Now, as Carl Jung says, "It's
as if the conscious mind
volunteers to die in order to
bear a new and fruitful life
in the unconscious despite
the fears of the unknown
and the fear that
inevitably arises
when a journey to the underworld
of Hades is completed."
Now, The Fool
started his journey
with a sense of trust,
and willingness,
and wanting to take a
risk no matter what.
And here, once again,
he has to take a risk
and to dare to now make
the journey inward.
His card represents that total
reversal of all knowledge that
was previously gained,
but it's in order
so that we may more
fully understand and gain
an even greater perspective.
Now, being turned
upside down, he's
in a position that's contrary to
what most people would position
themselves in life.
This especially
relates to the reversal
of thought and concepts.
For example, we might
realize that disease drives
us to learn the laws of
health, and that relationship
challenges are what
compel us to figure out
the secrets of harmony.
Thoughts like this are often
the exact opposite or reverse
of what most people
in the world think.
Now, The Hanged
Man has often been
referred to as the ah-ha
card, because it allows
you to view a stagnant situation
with a new perspective,
and it may provide a sudden
sense of illumination,
like the proverbial light
bulb that suddenly turns on.
Now, this is a card then
of meditation, stillness,
inner quiet, quieting
the mind and coming
into a state of
complete receptivity.
He's waiting for an
illumination or a vision
to enter from the divine realm.
Now, for this reason,
The Hanged Man's mantra
becomes not my will, but thine.
This is the attitude
of the initiate.
It's a voluntary surrender
of our ego's grasp
upon our will and our mind.
Now, take a look again at
the cross of the man's body.
Now, this confirms
that the hanging man
is in a position of gaining
wisdom through suffering.
Not everything gained
by deliberate discomfort
is relevant to this
particular path or key.
It represents the potential
fruits of hardship.
And his tale is
the archetypal myth
of the willing
sacrifice that leads
to a greater understanding
and wiser actions.
We can see a great
example of this archetype
in the story of the Norse God
Odin, who hung from the World
Tree for nine days and nights.
He hung inverted, he fasted,
he bled onto the Earth,
much like, for example,
how Native American sun
dancers do each year.
And he did this until he was
able to peer down to the depths
and receive a
vision of the runes.
And as a result of his
willing self-sacrifice,
he was able to bring back this
magical language of the runes
from the other realms and
then teach it to others.
And, ultimately, the only
truly worthwhile sacrifice
is the sacrifice
of our lesser self.
The true self really
can't be sacrificed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, this idea is also
captured in a metaphorical way
through the story of the
ancient Egyptian God, Osiris.
Now, his sacrifice
was not so much
a willing one,
because his life was
taken by his jealous brother,
Set, who assassinated him.
And then, his body was
further torn into 14 pieces
and scattered across Egypt.
And then, and I'm
abbreviating here,
but his wife, Isis, goes to
regather all these body parts
and magically revives him.
And Osiris then, after
that, becomes the risen god
of the Underworld, meaning his
true self is eternal and cannot
really be killed or sacrificed.
So his true self is revived.
Now, in the best
sense, The Hanged Man
reflects the lessons
of balance that
were learned from Justice or
Ma'at in the previous step.
He represents this
balance between
human and spiritual needs.
Now, even his clothing
shows this balance.
He has red leggings, which
represent fire and action,
but he also has a blue tunic,
which represents receptivity
and water.
So The Hanged Man offers
us two major challenges.
The first one is something
we call reframing, which
is the ability to set aside
our personal typical viewpoint
and perceive a situation
in another way.
The second lesson is timing,
waiting for that right moment
to receive knowledge
or to initiate action.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So what's Hanged Man
trying to show us here?
Most have said it's a path of
initiation, which kind of takes
us into a trance-like state or
a period of suspended animation.
Now, in alchemy, this
suspended animation
is part of the separation
stage where we've already
dissolved the solution from the
previous stage of disillusion,
and now we take that and
we set it aside for a while
and just leave it to settle.
Now, within us, this
separation stage
is a state of meditation
where we really intensely
self-examine.
And upon this path, our
personal consciousness
can give way to that
universal consciousness.
We can come to that
point of surrender.
One other important reminder
that The Hanged Man gives us
is that we can't always
control what happens in life.
But we can control how we
react to those circumstances.
The Hanged Man's esoteric
title or secret name
is The Spirit of
the Mighty Waters.
And the element is associated
with water here, which
relates to the astrological
correspondence which
is the planet Neptune.
Now, Neptune is a planet with
a watery fluidic kind of state.
It has this gaseous
fog, but it has also
a mist, and that
makes it actually
difficult for us to clearly
see the surface of Neptune.
Now, Neptune's fluid state makes
it very emotional, sensitive,
intuitive, and psychic at
a level of correspondence.
And Neptune can
spend so much time
daydreaming that
it might not always
be in touch with reality.
Now, Neptune got its name
from the Roman God of the sea,
or he's also Poseidon
to the Greeks.
He could bestow calm waters
when he was at a state of peace.
But when he was upset, he
would cause stormy seas.
In astrology, Neptune
co-rules Pisces
and the 12th house, which is
the house of self-undoing,
mysticism, and
places of seclusion.
Some other key words
associated with The Hanged Man
include having a new
perspective, surrender, faith,
and sacrifice.
As we work with The
Hanged Man card,
it helps us to find the sense
of truth and courage within us.
Helps us see those
new perspectives,
as well as clarify our emotions.
It uplifts us, and
it grants us access
to opportunities
for new visions,
and heightened awareness,
heightened instincts,
and sensitivity.
And it can also work for us to
help discover our life purpose.
Now, think of times when you've
either been or encountered
The Hanged Man in your life.
Now, as children,
for example, we often
looked at situations from
many different perspectives
and positions.
Children see the
world with fresh eyes
and creative
imagination, and it's
difficult to limit or
restrict a child in any way.
These are all Hanged
Man qualities.
But even as adults,
we might find
that were often assisting others
to look at their life problems
from different perspectives.
And the more you recognized
The Hanged Man in your life,
the more it will
then also connect you
with one of your parallel
lives where The Hanged
Man is the dominant archetype.
But what might one
of our parallel lives
look like under the
archetype of The Hanged Man?
Might be someone who for
seeks the luxuries of money
and worldly possessions
in order to dedicate
their life to a sacred path.
Or it could be someone who
pursued material success
and achieved it, only to then
have his life turned upside
down by an unexpected
accident or health trauma,
for example, a
near-death experience.
Their perspective of
what's important in life
is radically changed
now, and they
know that they have been
given a second chance at life,
and they need to use it well.
Now, a less severe way that
this archetype might manifest
is through someone who's
like a death psychologist,
or a therapist who helps people
to dive into their subconscious
and learn its inner workings.
By working with The
Hanged Man archetype
and invoking its
energies into your life,
you too can awaken your
ability to see things
from a new perspective
and more gracefully make
the needed sacrifices.
Join me again, as
we explore further
into the 22 archetypes
of Tarot, and how
they can help us to make our
big shift in consciousness.
I'm Dr. Theresa
Bullard, thank you
for exploring the
mysteries of Tarot
and our
multi-dimensionality with me
in this episode of
"Mystery Teachings".
[MYSTERY TEACHINGS THEME MUSIC]